Joe Pike as boxer Dan Darrel in Zambia in 1973 (Inset) Joe PikeGodwin Muzari: Memory LaneMost people know him as Jacob Huni from yesteryear soap Studio 263 where he dazzled with his cunning tricks in his plot to wrestle JH Construction company from other family members. Whenever he addressed his sister-in-law, Mai Huni, as Amaiguru in his funny accent, viewers knew he was up to some tricks. Joe Pike played Jacob in an interesting way, often assuming different identities to deceive people.Pike is also an interesting character in reality and traits of those cunning tricks have often sneaked into his real life. He is a man of many faces who once tried to trick his mother by assuming a fake name so that he could be a boxer without her knowledge.Yes, a boxer. He actually became a boxing champion in Zambia in 1973 under the pseudonym Dan Durrel, but that success blew his cover as the news filtered back home to Zimbabwe and his mother recognised his picture in a local newspaper.That is Pike for you. An interesting man who does not stop at anything when he wants to achieve something.As he went down memory lane yesterday, Pike shared exciting stories about Studio 263, boxing as well as twists and turns of his life.As Jacob Huni in Studio 263 Godwin Mawuru invited me to Studio 263. I had known him for a long time since we worked together on several projects in the advertising industry. I was a partner in an advertising agency and whenever we were doing promotional videos I would contract Mawuru to do the shooting, recalled Pike. He told me about his idea about the soap and I never thought he had a role for me in mind. When he said he wanted me to go for auditions I was surprised. I told him I had never acted, but he insisted. We went to his studio and they gave me the character profile and I gave it a try.Joe Pike After the auditions they said we were going straight for shooting. I remember my first episode was when I arrived at the Harare International Airport purportedly from London. Jacob was a man who had stayed in London for the better part of his life and his arrival spiced the soap. Jacob was part of a family business, but he wanted to snatch the company. Other family members tried to stop him. He was too clever for them and he could easily convince Amaiguru , who was overwhelmed by his Diaspora experience. Studio 263 was exciting and we were a family. I will always cherish the experience. I was introduced to acting. I fell in love with the art and I am now passionately following it. However, Pike left Studio 263 unceremoniously after almost three years when he clashed with Mawuru over remuneration of the cast. I was speaking on behalf of other cast members. I was getting worried about our salaries and Mawuru could not listen to me. He questioned why I was complaining on behalf of everyone else when I was paid more than most of them. I told him we were one family and everyone needed fair treatment. We had a disagreement and I decided to leave. However, we remained good friends until his death. After Studio 263, Pike had roles in Lobola and Go Chanaiwa Go and he is working on a soap that he intends to start shooting soon.As boxer Dan Durrel in ZambiaPike developed interest in boxing when he was growing up in Marondera. He said other children used to bully him and he was prepared to defend himself physically. He grew up with love for boxing, but his mother was against the sport. When he relocated to Zambia as an advertiser in 1964, he got a chance to pursue his sport away from his mother. He used the name Dan Durrel in the ring so that his mother would not know about his escapades. I became an amateur boxer as a part-time sport. I was working for a big advertising company and boxing became a hobby. After my success in various fights, boxing scouters recognised me and I participated in bigger tournaments. Interestingly, during one of tournaments his team fought an all-white team from Zimbabwe (then Rhodesia) and he won his fight. I could have represented Zambia as an amateur boxer at the 1968 Olympics, but I did not have a Zambian citizenship. In 1973 I was the Welterweight champion in Zambia and that is when The Sunday Mail in Rhodesia picked my story and published my picture. The cover was blown up and my mother knew what I was up to. However, it was too late for her to stop me. She actually made a boxing gown for me and sent it as present. I defended my title in 1974 and 1975 before I found a lucrative advertising job in Holland and relocated in 1975. The boxing chapter was closed.As DJ Mr Kool in Zambian clubsIt seems boxing was not Pike s only hobby. He also had love for music and went to the extent of being a music selector who ran his weekend slots at popular weekend outing spots. He once stayed in Ndola where he played at a place called Psychoset. He would play a mix of various music and had many followers every weekend.When he moved to Lusaka, he began another slot at The Dustbin club. He had many slots and would attract listeners of various music tastes. I enjoyed selecting music and seeing people dance madly. I looked for the best international hits and most people loved my collection. It was my way of relaxing and partying at weekends. As Joe Pike the advertiserAfter school Pike studied graphic designing and got a job with a local advertising company. When he moved to Zambia he worked for a company called Central Advertising and rose to the position of Creative Director. I got a similar job in Holland in 1975 and worked in the European country for five years. When Zimbabwe got independence in 1980, I returned home and worked for several big advertising companies before forming my company in 2002. Currently, I am working with Precious Workshop doing advertising consultancy and talk shows. 